now although the ceasefire in Gaza has
been extended gaza's health system has
collapsed the un's World Health
Organization is warning that untreated
diseases could become more deadly than
Israeli bombardment we can now speak to
Tark yerich who's the spokesperson at
the World Health Organization joining us
from Geneva thank you so much for your
time can you tell us how the who came up
with uh concluded that assessment that
uh people could more people could die
from diseases than bombings in
Gaza well what we have right now is 1.8
million uh gazans have been forced to
move out of their homes they are in
overcrowded settings uh they are lacking
uh clean water they are lacking food uh
and also the temperatures are dropping
so all this uh is making increased risk
for different s sort of infectious
diseases for respiratory diseases for uh
waterbor diseases for skin diseases and
we have already received information
about emergence of uh some of these
conditions and things will only get wor
unless there is a Improvement in access
to clean water and in uh in delivery of
Health Care unfortunately as you have
said the the the health system is near
collaps right now with 2third of
hospitals and two-third of Health
Centers not being functional any longer
and situation north of Gaza is of a
particular concern things let unack
let's let's unpack what you're saying
first I just want you to elaborate on
what you said a moment ago about you
already receiving reports from Gaza on
the emergence of these
diseases well uh for example we have
received a report rep on diarrhea cases
acute diarrhea cases and this can be
particularly uh uh uh dangerous in in
small children who don't have a strong
immunity and if there is no enough of
food and we have heard from our
colleagues from the world food program
that there is a serious risk of
malnutrition that would make a problem
even bigger there is also reports of
respiratory uh infections this is where
people are in crowded area things are
temperatures are getting uh uh lower and
that increases death risk and also
because people are in crowded settings
there are there is a risk of lies and
and other skin diseases because people
are in unhygienic conditions just to
give you the the scope of this there's
only one shower for 4,500 people and
there is the only one toilet unit for
more than 200 people right now in these
overcrowded settings so so all this is
increasing risk of of diseases on top of
the injuries due to the bombardment okay
so the warning that the who is putting
out that if the health system is not put
back on its feet then this is likely to
happen what needs to be done in your
opinion right now as a matter of
priority to put that Health System back
on its
feet well first of all we need uh
unhindered access to Gaza to bring in
medical supplies but medical supplies
are not enough we need fuel most of
these hospitals and health centers
stopped working because of lack of fuel
we need hospitals to be safe that people
can continue working in those hospitals
what we have seen last week in alifa and
other hospitals in the nor is is a
catastrophic because alifa was uh the
the best Hospital uh in in Gaza and it
nearly stopped all of its uh functions
so we need access we need fuel and we
need safety for health workers and for
patients and for this obviously what we
need is a sustained ceasefire what we
are hearing right now is is is is not
giving us much of Hope because there is
a talk of uh of renewed fighting and
that would bring more misery More Death
more injuries all right we'll leave it
there we thank you so much for joining
us from
Geneva